There was this movie titled “Vikram Vedha”.
Madhavan and Vijay Sethupathi. Good guy. Bad guy.
Good circumstances. Bad circumstances.
“Shall I tell you a story…, sir?”
The business of storytelling, and storytelling
in business! Let us learn more about this!
Namaste!
In the 267th Quotidian, we learned about the
art of storytelling. Yearn for a Yarn, was
its title! In the context of business, in
an organization, one can use “Storytelling”
to achieve much and have a great impact. You spin the narrative, you can empower the
workforce, take them in a group direction,...
and there are many books that talk about
this, many famous personalities have given
advice. They have given speeches. When you
dig around, you will notice that there are
these seven items that stand individually,
from the rest, clamoring to
you “Do this.. Do this…!” I am going
to distill those seven items and present them
before you today, in this Quotidian.
The first thing is, it is not enough if you
tell a story.. you need to be a conduit for
the rich exchange of stories between teller
and listener. You have to make it collaborative.
It is not one storyteller telling his or her
story to everybody who is ……. aaaaah (openmouthed
wonder!) listening. It has to be collaborative.
If you want me to take a stellar example for
this, I again go to Apple. A website called
www.folklore.org! I am still amazed at how
lucky they got, when they registered such
a domain name for themselves! Traditional
ancient word-of-mouth stories and anecdotes,
dot org! If you step inside, there are some
hundred and twenty five plus stories by employees,
customers, partners, visionaries, founders
of Apple. Including Steve Jobs himself. And,
their hard work, their creations, their launches,
the trials they went through, the challenges
they faced, the politics, the fights, the
chemistry, the successes, the failures, everything
intertwined and woven into an amazing tapestry!
Look at that sentence. It is a website devoted
to collective historic storytelling. Every
company needs a website like this. At least
on its intranet. Because as people join the
workforce, they need to know about the antiquated
history. If they are doing something today,
it is because they WERE doing something yesterday.
And that is because, they STARTED doing something
twenty-five years ago! That is important!
The second little nugget that you will unearth
when you dig around about storytelling in
business, it is to make it Engaging. Engaging?
Yes, the medium can make or break the message
you want to convey. There will always have
to be a grounding to what you already know.
But, there is no point in repeating what everybody
already knows! There has to be something new.
It can’t be completely new! You will be
mind-blown! There has to be familiarity, there
has to be a little-beyond-reach, some unfamiliarity.
There was this movie called “Turbo”.
A snail… it immediately conjures up images
of slow movement. It is an animal. Going slowly.
But, this animal has a desire...A dream. I
want to win in the races someday! I must be
a Racer Snail. There is a story that is spun
around it, just like the radioactive spider
that bit Spider-Man, here, it falls into the
exhaust of a car, gets infused with Nitrous
Oxide, and… in a believable manner, they
give an extension, and that is how you engage
an audience. And, once you engage, you can
give them your indoctrination!
The third little thing is, there has to
be structure! The moment you saw these four
letters, I am sure you have started wondering
what the four-letter word I have placed here
in a random jumble is, … you must have arrived
at CAKE as the answer. But, it was a little
hard, wasn’t it? The end goal is to get
to CAKE, but what is the structure you are
going to provide to them?
If you give them just this… they may try
a multitude of combinations… including perhaps
C K E A, and finally, they may arrive C A
K E, the right sequence!
But, imagine you give them a visual aid, like
this. As you form the letters, the beautiful
plate and that cylinder of that cake assist
you in forming the right word. You cannot
form “C A K E” in any other manner. If
you form it, it will look ugly. This makes
it so simple and easy that it becomes child’s
play!
You can take it even further! How about this?
You cut the jigsaw, the piece, so that they
will only fit in the right sequence...The
more structure you provide, the more they
will stop bothering about.. hey, is this the
end, is this the beginning, in what part of
the story are we currently, .. when is the
interval… they will stop bothering about
it.. and they will start paying attention
to the message in the story. If you try stunts
like in Virumaandi, or plan your plot like
the movie Vantage Point, or script your stories
like Rashomon (Kurasawa), the Japanese director,
people will take too long to first understand
where the story begins, how it is proceeding,
and they may miss out on the essence under
the message! Careful!
The next item is Performance. Anybody can
just narrate a story. But, every storytelling
moment is an opportunity to perform. A performance
doesn’t just mean you stand on the stage
and deliver something. It is about the words
you use, it is about the body language, it
is about the tone, it is about the tempo,
the timing, the props you use.
Look at Steve Jobs. 2002. A coffin. On a stage!
He is burying something. An OS! “Mac OS
9 was a friend to us all! Please join me in
a moment of silence, as we remember our old
friend, Mac OS 9!” A rose to boot! He basically
RULED the day! Users were clamouring not to
retire the version 9! At that time, by telling
a story like this, and along the way, criticising
Microsoft for something, criticising software
pirates for something, … watch the video
in full! I have chopped off a few parts. The
way he used those props, and the way he rallied
the audience to empathise with him, and commiserate
about what is happening, that was beautiful.
So, every storytelling moment is an opportunity
to perform magic. Remember that magician on
stage.
Then, it has to be tangible. Tangible? Something
that you can touch and feel. See by eye, hear
by ear, the sense organs get suffused by the
input… That is why many people don’t like
the television much. Or watch it in a theater.
They want to watch a drama instead. Why? In
a drama, there is a three-dimensional depth
involved. In a drama, I can see, I can touch,
I can feel. Watch this performer on stage.
His name is Tom Sligting. He is… a global
speaker. And, one of the things he does on
stage to engage with the audience… is…
Catapultiser! For Q and A! So, it is a fluffy
toy, a
squeezy toy, so it can take a fall. It has
got a microphone embedded inside. So, people
can actually hold the toy close to their mouth
and they can actually speak out their question.
“Can I have the mic please?”, “Wait,
the mic is coming!”, … nothing of that
sort! Compare with this! Such a beautiful
performer — I have seen him live twice till
now, and Tom Sligting has figured out … that
tangible storytelling. He is implementing
it perfectly. Not only tangible! He is also
collaborating. Because he is making the audience
participate too! He is creating a great confluence
of thoughts and narratives! That is TWO out
of SEVEN!
Then, it has to be fun! What is fun? You need
to mock somebody. Somebody must be the brunt
of that joke. Could be we ourselves! Could
be the person with us. Or, could be somebody
else outside, elsewhere. Fun is also, if you
dig deep and analyse it, you will realise,
it is the slight bending of rules. A person
walking, should continue walking… But, why
is that person falling? Well, there is a banana
peel on the floor that he didn’t see. So,
a little fun! Bending of the rules of gravity.
Watch this movie. We all know Shrek, the green
monster! We all wait… Anticipating she will
turn into a beautiful princess.. She has fallen.
She is turned the other way. She gets up.
There, we get a lesson! You are beautiful
to my eyes, just like I am handsome in your
eyes! So, it is a sense of expectation, that
suddenly deflates, or suddenly takes a completely
different direction. It is a great way to
introduce a little fun. They would have all
laughed, when they watched this particular
scene. The moment this is done, a nice philosophical
lesson… “Hey, She looks good to me, and
that’s what matters!” A great storytelling
strategy!
And finally, it has to be realistic. The moment
I say realistic, I am reminded of that waterfall
in which Baahubali performs a death-defying
stunt. He will jump into empty space, turn
180 degrees, shoot an arrow, the arrow will
carry a vine, it will get knotted up into
a tree, and then he will… A little realism
is useful. It has to be plausible. It has
to be applicable. Yes, it can be a little
out of reach, but it has to be believable.
There used to be this rumour about Rajini
Kanth, that he had acted thus in a movie.
I came to know, later, that it wasn’t Rajini.
San Basilio — a Filipino movie. Came out
in 1981. A scene in that movie rolls thus!
A bullet...Only one bullet remains. Two people
running. This man uses a knife to slice the
bullet in its path… and hits two different
people. By the way, myth busters have tested
it… and after testing it,…have declared
that this is actually possible! You CAN actually
aim a bullet at a knife.. The knife doesn’t
even need to be too sharp or strong, because
of the speed at which the bullet is coming,
it can actually be split in two.. But, it
is still not believable, is it? If you are
going to tell us a story, ground it. Make
it believable. Then, push it just a little
beyond that envelope. That is how you master
that art of storytelling for business empowerment.
So, let us quickly summarise those seven items.
It has to be collaborative. It has to be engaging.
That is very important. It has to be structured.
Where is the head. Where is the tail. It has
to be performative. Remember Steve Jobs. It
has to be tangible. I should be able to touch,
feel, probably even smell, whatever.. Those
sense organs, it has to impact. It has to
be fun. And finally, hey, make it a little
believable...Introduce realism into it.
Thank you!
Oh, we will meet again on the 13th of this
month. Bye bye!